Since I was raised from earliest infancy to undertake the historian'scalling, and since it is now certain that I shall never claim thatprofession as my own, it seems fitting that I perform my first and lastact as an historian.
I shall write the history of that strange and unique woman, the motherof my thirty brothers and myself, Miss Donna Mitchell.
She was a person of extraordinary strength and vision, our mother. Iremember her vividly, seeing her with all her sons gathered 'roundher in our secluded Wisconsin farmhouse on the first night of summer,after we had returned to her from every part of the country for oursummer's vacation.
One-and-thirty strapping sons, each one of us sixfeet one inch tall, with a shock of unruly yellow hair and keen, clearblue eyes, each one of us healthy, strong, well-nourished, each one ofus twenty-one years and fourteen days old, one-and-thirty identicalbrothers.
Oh, there were differences between us, but only we and she couldperceive them. To outsiders, we were identical; which was why, tooutsiders, we took care never to appear together in groups. Weourselves knew the differences, for we had lived with them so long.
I knew my brother Leonard's cheekmole--the right cheek it was, settinghim off from Jonas, whose left cheek was marked with a flyspeck.
I knewthe faint tilt of Peter's chin, the slight oversharpness of Dewey'snose, the florid tint of Donald's skin, I recognized Paul by hispendulous earlobes, Charles by his squint, Noel by the puckering of hislowerlip. David had a blue-stubbled face, Mark flaring nostrils, Claudethick brows.
Yes, there were differences. We rarely confused one with another. Itwas second nature for me to distinguish Edward from Albert, George fromPhilip, Frederick from Stephen.
And Mother _never_ confused us.
She was a regal woman, nearly six feet in height, who even in middleage had retained straightness of posture and majesty of bearing.
Her eyes, like ours, were blue; her hair, she told us, had once beengolden like ours. Her voice was a deep, mellow contralto; rich, firm,commanding, the voice of a strong woman.
She had been Professor ofBiochemistry at some Eastern university (she never told us which one,hating its name so) and we all knew by heart the story of her bitterlife and of our own strange birth.

"I had a theory," she would say.
"It wasn't an orthodox theory, and itmade people angry to think about it, so of course they threw me out.
But I didn't care.
In many ways that was the most fortunate day of mylife."
"Tell us about it, Mother," Philip would invariably ask.
He wasdestined to be a playwright; he enjoyed the repetition of the storywhenever we were together.
She said:
"I had a theory.
I believed that environment controlled personality,that given the same set of healthy genes any number of different adultscould be shaped from the raw material.
I had a plan for testing it--butwhen I told them, they discharged me.
Luckily I had married a wealthyif superficial-minded executive, who had suffered a fatal coronaryattack the year before.
I was independently wealthy, thanks to him, andfree to pursue independent research, thanks to my University discharge.
So I came to Wisconsin and began my great project."
We knew the rest of the story by heart, as a sort of litany.
We knew how she had bought a huge, rambling farm in the flat greencountry of central Wisconsin, a farm far from prying eyes. Then, how ona hot summer afternoon she had gone forth to the farmland nearby, andfound a fieldhand, tall and brawny, and to his great surprise seducedhim in the field where he worked.
And then, the story of that single miraculous zygote, which our motherhad extracted from her body and carefully nurtured in special nutrienttanks, irradiating it and freezing it and irritating it and dosing itwith hormones until, exasperated, it sub-divided into thirty-two, eachone of which developed independently into a complete embryo.
Embryo grew into fetus, and fetus into child, in Mother's ingeniousartificial wombs. One of the thirty-two died before birth of accidentalnarcosis; the remainder survived, thirty-one identical males sprungfrom the same egg, to become us.
With the formidable energy that typified her, Mother single-handednursed thirty-one baby boys; we thrived, we grew.
And then the mostcrucial stage of the experiment began.
We were differentiated at theage of eighteen months, each given his own room, his own particulartoys, his own special books later on.
Each of us was slated fora different profession.
It was the ultimate proof of her theory.
Genetically identical, physically identical except for the minorchanges time had worked on our individual bodies, we would neverthelessseek out different fields of employ.
She worked out the assignments at random, she said. Philip was to bea playwright, Noel a novelist, Donald a doctor. Astronomy was Allan'sgoal, Barry's biology, Albert's the stage.
George was to be a concertpianist, Claude a composer, Leonard a member of the bar, Dewey adentist.
Mark was to be an athlete; David, a diplomat.
Journalismwaited for Jonas, poetry for Peter, painting for Paul.
Edward wouldbecome an engineer, Saul a soldier, Charles a statesman; Stephen wouldgo to sea.
Martin was aimed for chemistry, Raymond for physics, Jamesfor high finance.
Ronald would be a librarian, Robert a bookkeeper,John a priest, Douglas a teacher. Anthony was to be a literary critic,William a librarian, Frederick an airplane pilot.
For Richard wasreserved a life of crime; as for myself, Harold, I was to devote myenergies to the study and writing of history.
This was my mother's plan.
Let me tell of my own childhood andadolescence, to illustrate its workings.

My first recollections are of books. I had a room on the second floorof our big house.
Martin's room was to my left, and in later years Iwould regret it, for the air was always heavy with the stink of hischemical experiments. To my right was Noel, whose precocious typewritersometimes pounded all night as he worked on his endless first novel.
But those manifestations came later. I remember waking one morning tofind that during the night a bookcase had been placed in my room, andin it a single book--Hendrik Willem van Loon's _Story of Mankind_.
Iwas four, almost five, then; thanks to Mother's intensive trainingwe were all capable readers by that age, and I puzzled over thebig type, learning of the exploits of Charlemagne and Richard theLionhearted and staring at the squiggly scratches that were van Loon'sillustrations.
Other books followed, in years to come.
H.G.
Wells' _Outline ofHistory_, which fascinated and repelled me at the same time.
Toynbee, in the Somervell abridgement, and later, when I had enteredadolescence, the complete and unabridged edition.
Churchill, with hisflowing periods and ringing prose.
Sandburg's poetic and massive lifeof Lincoln; Wedgwood on the Thirty Years' War; Will Durant, in six orseven block-like volumes.
I read these books, and where I did not understand I read on anyway,knowing I would come back to that page in some year to come and bringnew understanding to it.
Mother helped, and guided, and chivvied. Asense of the panorama of man's vast achievement sprang up in me.
Tojoin the roll of mankind's chroniclers seemed the only possible end formy existence.
Each summer from my fourteenth to my seventeenth, I travelled--alone,of course, since Mother wanted to build self-reliance in us. I visitedthe great historical places of the United States: Washington, D.C.,Mount Vernon, Williamsburg, Bull Run, Gettysburg.
A sense of the pastrose in me.
Those summers were my only opportunities for contact with strangers,since during the year and especially during the long snowbound winterswe stayed on the farm, a tight family unit.
We never went to publicschool; obviously, it was impossible to enroll us, en masse, withoutarousing the curiosity my mother wished to avoid.
Instead, she tutored us privately, giving us care and attention that noprofessional teacher could possibly have supplied. And we grew older,diverging toward our professions like branching limbs of a tree.
As a future historian, of course, I took it upon myself to observe thechanges in my own society, which was bounded by the acreage of ourfarm. I made notes on the progress of my brothers, keeping my notebookswell hidden, and also on the changes time was working on Mother. Shestood up surprisingly well, considering the astonishing burden she hadtaken upon herself.
Formidable was the best word to use in describingher.
We grew into adolescence.
By this time Martin had an imposing chemicallaboratory in his room; Leonard harangued us all on legal fine points,and Anthony pored over Proust and Kafka, delivering startling criticalinterpretations. Our house was a beehive of industry constantly,and I don't remember being bored for more than three consecutiveseconds, at any time.
There were always distractions: Claude andGeorge jostling for room on the piano bench while they played Claude'sfour-hand sonata, Mark hurling a baseball through a front window, Peterdeclaiming a sequence of shocking sonnets during our communal dinner.
We fought, of course, since we were healthy individualists with soundbodies. Mother encouraged it; Saturday afternoon was wrestling time,and we pitted our growing strengths against one another.
Mother was always the dominant figure, striding tall and erect aroundthe farm, calling to us in her familiar boom, assigning us chores,meeting with us privately.
Somehow she had the knack of making each ofus think we were the favorite child, the one in whose future she wasmost deeply interested of all.
It was false, of course; though onceJonas unkindly asserted that Barry must be her _real_ favorite, becausehe, like her, was a biologist.
I doubted it.
I had learned much about people through my constantreading, and I knew that Mother was something extraordinary--a fanatic,if you like, or merely a woman driven by an inner demon, but stilland all a person of overwhelming intellectual drive and conviction,whose will to know the truth had led her to undertake this fantasticexperiment in biology and human breeding.
I knew that no woman of that sort could stoop to petty favoritism.
Mother was unique.
Perhaps, had she been born a man, she would havechanged the entire course of human development.
When we were seventeen, she called us all together round the big tablein the common room of our rambling home.
She waited, needing to clearher throat only once in order to cut the hum of conversation.
"Sons," she said, and the echo rang through the entire first floor ofthe house.
"Sons, the time has come for you to leave the farm."

We were stunned, even those of us who were expecting it.
But sheexplained, and we understood, and we did not quarrel.
One could not become a doctor or a chemist or a novelist or even anhistorian in a total vacuum. One had to enter the world. And one neededcertain professional qualifications.
We were going to college.
Not all of us, of course.
Robert was to be a bookkeeper; he would goto a business school.
Mark had developed, through years of practice,into a superb right-handed pitcher, and he was to go to Milwaukee for amajor-league tryout.
Claude and George, aspiring composer and aspiringpianist, would attend an eastern conservatory together, posing as twins.
The rest of us were to attend colleges, and those who were to go onto professions such as medicine or chemistry would plan to attendprofessional schools afterward. Mother believed the college educationwas essential, even to a poet or a painter or a novelist.
Only one of us was not sent to any accredited institution.
He wasRichard, who was to be our criminal.
Already he had made severalsallies into the surrounding towns and cities, returning a few days ora few weeks later with money or jewels and with a guilty grin on hisface.
He was simply to be turned loose into the school of Life, andMother warned him never to get caught.
As for me, I was sent to Princeton and enrolled as a liberal-artsstudent.
Since, like my brothers, I was privately educated, I had nodiplomas or similar records to show them, and they had to give me anequivalency examination in their place.
Evidently I did quite well,for I was immediately accepted. I wired Mother, who sent a check for$3,000 to cover my first year's tuition and expenses.
I enrolled as a History major; among my first-year courses wereMedieval English Constitutional History and the Survey of WesternHistorical Currents; naturally, my marks were the highest in the classin both cases. I worked diligently and even with a sort of frenziedfury.
My other courses, in the sciences or in the arts, I devoted nomore nor no less time to than was necessary, but history was my rulingpassion.
At least, through my first two semesters of college.

June came, and final exam, and then I returned to Wisconsin, whereMother was waiting.
It was June 21 when I returned; since not allcolleges end their spring semester simultaneously, some of my brothershad been home for more than a week, others had not yet arrived. Richardhad sent word that he was in Los Angeles, and would be with us afterthe first of July.
Mark had signed a baseball contract and was pitchingfor a team in New Mexico, and he, too, would not be with us.
The summer passed rapidly.
We spent it as we had in the old daysbefore college, sharing our individual specialties, talking, meetingregularly and privately with Mother to discuss the goals that stilllay ahead. Except for Claude and George, we had scattered in differentdirections, no two of us at the same school.
I returned to Princeton that fall, for my sophomore year. It passed,and I made the homeward journey again, and in the fall travelled oncemore eastward. The junior year went by likewise.
And I began to detect signs of a curious change in my inward self.
It was a change I did not dare mention to Mother, on those July dayswhen I met with her in her room near the library.
I did not tell mybrothers, either. I kept my knowledge to myself, brooding over it,wondering why it was that this thing should happen to me, why I shouldbe singled out.
For I was discovering that the study of history bored me utterly andcompletely.
The spirit of rebellion grew in me during my final year in college.
Mymarks had been excellent; I had achieved Phi Beta Kappa and severalgraduate schools were interested in having me continue my studies withthem. But I had been speaking to a few chosen friends (none of whomknew my bizarre family background, of course) and my values had beenslowly shifting.
I realized that I had mined history as deeply as I ever cared to.
Waking and sleeping, for more than fifteen years, I had ponderedWaterloo and Bunker Hill, considered the personalities of Cromwell andJames II, held imaginary conversations with Jefferson and AugustusCaesar and Charles Martel.
And I was bored with it.
It began to become evident to others, eventually.
One day during myfinal semester a friend asked me, "Is there something worrying you,Harry?"
I shook my head quickly--_too_ quickly.
"No," I said. "Why? Do I lookworried?"
"You look worse than worried. You look obsessed."
We laughed about it, and finally we went down to the student center andhad a few beers, and before long my tongue had loosened a little.
I said, "There _is_ something worrying me.
And you know what it is? I'mafraid I won't live up to the standards my family set for me."
Guffaws greeted me.
"Come off it, Harry! Phi Bete in your junior year,top class standing, a brilliant career in history ahead of you--what dothey want from you, blood?"
I chuckled and gulped my beer and mumbled something innocuous, butinside I was curdling.
Everything I was, I owed to Mother. She made me what I am. But I wasplayed out, as a student of history; I was the family failure, thegoat, the rotten egg.
Raymond still wrestled gleefully with nuclearphysics, with Heisenberg and Schrodinger and the others. Mark gloriedin his fastball and his slider and his curve.
Paul daubed canvasmerrily in his Greenwich Village flat near N.Y.U., and even Robertseemed to take delight in keeping books.
Only I had failed. History had become repugnant to me.
I was inrebellion against it.
I would disappoint my mother, become the buttof my brothers' scorn, and live in despair, hating the profession ofhistorian and fitted by training for nothing else.
I was graduated from Princeton summa cum laude, a few days after mytwenty-first birthday.
I wired Mother that I was on my way home, andbought train-tickets.
It was a long and grueling journey to Wisconsin.
I spent my timethinking, trying to choose between the unpleasant alternatives thatfaced me.
I could attempt duplicity, telling my mother I was still studyinghistory, while actually preparing myself for some more attractiveprofession--the law, perhaps.
I could confess to her at once my failure of purpose, ask herforgiveness, for disappointing her and flawing her grand scheme, andtry to begin afresh in another field.
Or I could forge ahead with history, compelling myself grimly to takean interest, cramping and paining myself so that my mother's designwould be complete.
None of them seemed desirable paths to take.
I brooded over it, and wasweary and apprehensive by the time I arrived at our farm.

The first of my brothers I saw was Mark.
He sat on the front porch ofthe big house, reading a book which I recognized at once and with somesurprise as Volume I of Churchill.
He looked up at me and smiled feebly.
I frowned. "I didn't expect to find _you_ here, Mark.
According to thelocal sports pages the Braves are playing on the Coast this week.
Howcome you're not with them?"
His voice was a low murmur. "Because they gave me my release," he said.
"What?"
He nodded. "I'm washed up at 21.
They made me a free agent; that meansI can hook up with any team that wants me."
"And you're just taking a little rest before offering yourself around?"
He shook his head. "I'm through. Kaput.
Harry, I just can't standbaseball.
It's a silly, stupid game.
You know how many times I had tostand out there in baggy knickers and throw a bit of horsehide at somejerk with a club in his paws? A hundred, hundred-fifty times a game,every four days. For what? What the hell does it all mean? Why should Ibother?"
There was a strange gleam in his eyes. I said, "Have you told Mother?"
"I don't dare! She thinks I'm on leave, or something.
Harry, how can Itell her--"
"I know." Briefly, I told him of my own disenchantment with history.
We were mutually delighted to learn that we were not alone in ouraffliction.
I picked up my suitcases, scrambled up the steps, and wentinside.
Dewey was cleaning up the common room as I passed through. He noddedhello glumly.
I said, "How's the tooth trade?"
He whirled and glared at me viciously.
"Something wrong?" I asked.
"I've been accepted by four dental schools, Harry."
"Is that any cause for misery?"
He let the broom drop, walked over to me, and whispered, "I'll murderyou if you tell Mother this. But the thought of spending my life pokingaround in foul-smelling oral cavities sickens me.
_Sickens._"
"But I thought--"
"Yeah. You thought.
You've got it soft; you just need to dig books outof the library and rearrange what they say and call it new research. Ihave to drill and clean and fill and plug and--" He stopped. "Harry,I'll kill you if you breathe a word of this. I don't want Mother toknow that I didn't come out the way she wanted."
I repeated what I had said to Mark--and told him about Mark, for goodmeasure.
Then I made my way upstairs to my old room. I felt a burdenlifting from me; I was not alone.
At least two of my brothers felt thesame way.
I wondered how many more were at last rebelling against thedisciplines of a lifetime.
Poor Mother, I thought! Poor Mother!

Our first family council of the summer was held that night.
Stephenand Saul were the last to arrive, Stephen resplendent in his Annapolisgarb, Saul crisp-looking and stiff-backed from West Point.
Mother hadworked hard to wangle appointments for those two.
We sat around the big table and chatted. The first phase of ourlives, Mother told us, had ended. Now, our preliminary educationswere complete, and we would undertake the final step towards ourprofessions, those of us who had not already entered them.
Mother looked radiant that evening, tall, energetic, her white haircropped mannishly short, as she sat about the table with her thirty-onestrapping sons. I envied and pitied her: envied her for the sweetserenity of her life, which had proceeded so inexorably and withoutswerve toward the goal of her experiment, and pitied her for thedisillusioning that awaited her.
For Mark and Dewey and I were not the only failures in the crop.
I had made discreet enquiries, during the day.
I learned that Anthonyfound literary criticism to be a fraud and a sham, that Paul knewclearly he had no talent as a painter (and, also, that very few of hiscontemporaries did either), that Robert bitterly resented a career ofbookkeeping, that piano-playing hurt George's fingers, that Claude hadhad difficulty with his composing because he was tone-deaf, that thejournalistic grind was too strenuous for Jonas, that John longed toquit the seminarial life because he had no calling, that Albert hatedthe uncertain bohemianism of an actor's life--
We circulated, all of us raising for the first time the question thathad sprouted in our minds during the past several years. I made theastonishing discovery that not one of Donna Mitchell's sons cared forthe career that had been chosen for him.
The experiment had been a resounding flop.
Late that evening, after Mother had gone to bed, we remained together,discussing our predicament.
How could we tell her? How could we destroyher life's work? And yet, how could we compel ourselves to lives ofunending drudgery?
Robert wanted to study engineering; Barry, to write.
I realized I caredmuch more for law than for history, while Leonard longed to exchangelaw for the physical sciences. James, our banker-manque, much preferredpolitics. And so it went, with Richard (who claimed five robberies, arape, and innumerable picked pockets) pouring out his desire to settledown and live within the law as an honest farmer.
It was pathetic.
Summing up the problem in his neat forensic way, Leonard said, "Here'sour dilemma: do we all keep quiet about this and ruin our lives, or dowe speak up and ruin Mother's experiment?"
"I think we ought to continue as is, for the time being," Saul said.
"Perhaps Mother will die in the next year or two.
We can start overthen."
"Perhaps she _doesn't_ die?" Edward wanted to know.
"She's tough asnails. She may last another twenty or thirty or even forty years."
"And we're past twenty-one already," remarked Raymond. "If we hang ontoo long at what we're doing, it'll be too late to change.
You can'tstart studying for a new profession when you're thirty-five."
"Maybe we'll get to _like_ what we're doing, by then," suggested Davidhopefully.
"Diplomatic service isn't as bad as all that, and I'd say--"
"What about me?" Paul yelped. "I can't paint and I know I can't paint.
I've got nothing but starvation ahead of me unless I wise up and getinto business in a hurry.
You want me to keep messing up good whitecanvas the rest of my life?"
"It won't work," said Barry, in a doleful voice, "We'll have to tellher."
Douglas shook his head. "We can't do that.
You know just what she'lldo.
She'll bring down the umpteen volumes of notes she's made on thisexperiment, and ask us if we're going to let it all come to naught."
"He's right," Albert said. "I can picture the scene now.
The bigorgan-pipe voice blasting us for our lack of faith, the accusations ofingratitude--"
"Ingratitude?" William shouted. "She twisted us and pushed us andmolded us without asking our permission.
Hell, she _created_ us withher laboratory tricks. But that didn't give her the right to makezombies out of us."
"Still," Martin said, "we can't just go to her and tell her that it'sall over. The shock would kill her."
"Well?" Richard asked in the silence that followed. "What's wrong withthat?"
For a moment, no one spoke.
The house was quiet; we heard footstepsdescending the stairs. We froze.
Mother appeared, an imperial figure even in her old housecoat.
"Youboys are kicking up too much of a racket down here," she boomed. "Iknow you're glad to see each other again after a year, but I need mysleep."
She turned and strode upstairs again.
We heard her bedroom door slamshut.
For an instant we were all ten-year-olds again, diligentlystudying our books for fear of Mother's displeasure.
I moistened my lips. "Well?" I asked. "I call for a vote on Richard'ssuggestion."

Martin, as a chemist, prepared the drink, using Donald's medical adviceas his guide.
Saul, Stephen, and Raymond dug a grave, in the woods atthe back of our property.
Douglas and Mark built the coffin.
Richard, ending his criminal career with a murder to which we were allaccessories before the fact, carried the fatal beverage upstairs toMother the next morning, and persuaded her to sip it.
One sip was allthat was necessary; Martin had done his work well.
Leonard offered us a legal opinion: it was justifiable homicide.
Weplaced the body in its coffin and carried it out across the fields.
Richard, Peter, Jonas, and Charles were her pallbearers; the others ofus followed in their path.
We lowered the body into the ground and John said a few words over her.
Then, slowly, we closed over the grave and replaced the sod, and beganthe walk back to the house.
"She died happy," Anthony said. "She never suspected the size of herfailure." It was her epitaph.
As our banker, James supervised the division of her assets, whichwere considerable, into thirty-one equal parts. Noel composed a shortfragment of prose which we agreed summed up our sentiments.
We left the farm that night, scattering in every direction, anxiousto begin life.
All that went before was a dream from which we nowawakened. We agreed to meet at the farm each year, on the anniversaryof her death, in memory of the woman who had so painstakingly divideda zygote into thirty-two viable cells, and who had spent a score ofyears conducting an experiment based on a theory that had proven to beutterly false.
We felt no regret, no qualm. We had done what needed to be done, and onthat last day some of us had finally functioned in the professions forwhich Mother had intended us.
I, too.
My first and last work of history will be this, an account ofMother and her experiment, which records the beginning and the end ofher work.
And now it is complete.
